
There are two implied active ingredients in motivational interviewing – a relational
component and a technical component. The spirit of motivational interviewing is concerned
with this relational aspect. This fundamental approach has four components, which often overlap. These
are:
1. #Partnership (or collaboration)
2. #Acceptance
3. #Compassion
4. #Evocation
So what do these components look like in practice?


#Partnership or collaboration
Partnership or collaboration means working in partnership with the client, where the key
worker is supportive rather than persuasive. It means working alongside a client rather than
in front of or opposed to them. A confronting approach is the antithesis of the spirit of
motivational interviewing. So while the key worker respects the autonomy of the client and
the ownership of the issues as the clients, the language of the key worker will be inclusive,
e.g. “How do we work together to come up with options...” The key worker, by working
collaboratively with the client, creates a positive atmosphere conducive to change. They
show a respect for a variety of ideas about how change can occur and can accept
differences between their ideal plan and what clients are willing to endorse. They avoid
persuasion and instead focus on supporting and exploring the client’s concerns and ideas.
The key worker aims to minimise power differentials and views their clients as partners.
Poor adherence to a collaborative stance would see the key worker viewing the client as
deficient in some manner and attempting to provide what is missing, often using an expert
stance to do so.

#Acceptance
Acceptance in the context of motivational interviewing is divided into four key points, these being:
1. Absolute worth
2. Autonomy and support
3. Affirmation and,
4. Accurate empathy

1 - Absolute worth is knowing and understanding that everyone’s dignity is the same and
that we are all trying to figure out who we are, where we are going and how we are going to
get there. If the client feels their situation, no matter how dire, is understood and is given
due respect, they will be far more likely to be open and honest regarding their issues.
2 - Autonomy and Support in motivational interviewing terms means that the responsibility
for change is left with the client. This means that the key worker demonstrates respect for
the client, for their resourcefulness and their ability to make choices, and indeed respects
that they may choose not to change. They do not push for an immediate commitment at the
expense of ‘taking the long view’ about the option of change in the future. The antithesis of
this is for the key worker to take an authoritarian approach where they tell the client what
he or she must or should do, which comes from an assumption that you know better than
the client. Key workers with poor adherence to client autonomy may have difficulty
accepting that clients might choose to avoid or delay change, or may decide to proceed with
change in an unconventional manner. They convey a sense of urgency about the need for
change.
3 - Affirmation is about finding ways to point out positive things to the individual. It is not
about inundating the client with unwarranted praise nor is it about colluding with the client.
What affirmation is really about is reinforcing those specific things the client says or does
that may assist in understanding and/or making a change.
4 - Accurate empathy is a core skill of MI and involves much more that simply repeating
back what someone says. It’s about conveying to the client that you are really trying to
understand what’s going on with them and what this problem means to them.

#Compassion
Compassion means that as the helper we are trying to work with clients in a non-
judgemental, non-blaming, non-shaming way and are striving to be as empathic as possible.
Essentially we are trying to understand what this problem is like for the client and what it
means for them. By doing this we are attempting to help them find some form of
acceptance of what is going on or to move onto a different place regarding their issue(s).
In order to feel compassion for someone we must comprehend their point of view and
experience, at least to some degree. However compassion alone, without sustained
empathetic understanding can be counter-therapeutic. It is not uncommon in everyday life
for people to feel compassion based on the fact the other person is suffering. Despite this it
is still possible to completely misperceive and misunderstand what the person is really
trying to communicate, regarding what’s bothering them and their experience of that
bother. Key workers can do this too, believing they are being empathetic because they feel
compassion for the client’s situation, but misunderstand the complexity of the clients
experience due to seeing the client through a ‘therapist’s theoretical preconceptions.’
On the other hand empathy without some kind of sympathy or compassion could be used
(intentionally or not) in a manipulative or cruel fashion. Perhaps it is fair to say that
empathetic understanding without compassion can be manipulative and dangerous.
Compassion without empathic understanding on the other hand can be short sighted and of
limited therapeutic value. Following these four steps as a guideline will prevent this
situation from occurring:
1. Recognition of emotions
2. Recognition of emotions in others
3. Being able to accurately feel what it would be like to be in that person’s position
4. Based on the above, be able to adjust our own behaviour accordingly
A minimal level of empathy appears to be a universal human necessity for effective
interpersonal functioning. Those who can’t make sense of the mental states of others, at
least to some degree, are limited in their interpersonal functioning. In addition, empathy
often involves a more complex form of interpersonal understanding and involves the ability
to really experience or taste and share the experience of the client, at least to some degree.
The spirit of motivational interviewing


#Evocation
Evocation means to draw out of the client their own perceptions, goals and values, thus key
worker starts with the assumption that the resources and motivation for change reside in
the client. In practice, this means that the key worker is eliciting from the client, rather than
imparting information or opinions and so is doing more listening than talking.
Key workers high in evocation are curious and patient. They give the client the benefit of the
doubt about wanting to change and show a focused intent to draw out the client’s own
desire and reasons for changing. A key worker with a poor adherence to evocation may
focus on giving information, educating the client or giving logical reasons for changing, at
the expense of arranging conversations so that the client talks themselves into changing.
Take the frustration out of helping people change! Would you like the ability to quickly engage with
clients, elicit loads of change talk, and ultimately help clients to help themselves?
Click here to discover how we can help you